So let's talk about the
consumer credit landscape
just to sort of get us started.
So first, just think about
a household balance sheet.
Household balance sheet,
the liabilities and the assets.
If you look at the assets
of typical household, what
are you going to see?
Well, you've got
the physical assets.
Usually you've got a house and
you probably have a car
maybe couple of cars.
Well, now if you're lucky,
you've got a boat and
you've got a vacation home.
Lots of things you might see.
But typically, what
do you think about?
You're thinking about
a house and one or two cars.
You got those physical assets
and then you've
got some financial assets,
your retirement savings,
you've got your 401K
or other sorts of
retirement savings,
maybe you've got some other
investments you've got going,
you'll see those assets as well.
Then of course you've
got another asset
of the household is going
to be the human capital,
the skills and experience
that members of
the household have
acquired which are going
to be valuable for
them going forward,
giving them the possibility to
add value and make
money in years to come.
So those are the assets
you're going to see.
What about the liabilities?
Well, now you're going to
see and the liability side,
you're going to see
the debt that was
incurred in acquiring
those assets.
So you have a house.
Well, you have the mortgage
that helped you buy
the house and you have cars.
Well, very often you have
car loans that helped
you buy the cars.
Then for that human capital,
well there's the student loans.
You have student loans
that you took out to pay
the tuition so that
you can go to school,
get that degree, get the training
and now have that human capital.
So you have that too. What
else you're going to see?
Well, there can be credit
card debt that you
incurred for whatever
purpose and of course,
there could be
some other debt too.
Here is a graph that
I got off the website of
the Federal Reserve Bank
of New York.
This is actually a great
website for you guys
to look at in your spare time.
They've got consumer credit,
sort of sliced and
diced every way,
sort of quantities and interest
rates and delinquency,
all the different sort
of statistics,
warning signs and so on you
might be interested in.
I just picked off here
their summary chart
showing just total household
debt evolving over time.
So you look at
this graph here we're
seeing household debt in the US,
total household debt
evolving from the beginning
of 2003 all the way
to the end of 2018.
So every bar here is a quarter.
So the total height of the bar is
all household debt and then
the different colors are
the different types
of household debt.
You see the orange
is the biggest.
That's your mortgage debt.
Then you've also got
home equity lines.
You've got car loans.
You've got credit card debt.
You've got your student debt
and then finally,
one sort of catch-all for the
other which is where by the way,
all the FinTech lending is
going to show up, a lot of it.
So you look at this graph you
see well, one thing of course.
You see the big picture there.
You can see which looks
very gentle here.
It wasn't gentle
when it happened.
It was the financial
crisis right.
You can see the ramp up,
you can see more
debt through like
09 or so and then it comes off.
Why is it coming off?
Well, of course,
you can see mortgages
go up and come down.
A lot of that would
be of course for
closures and other
problems like that.
So you see consumer debt come up,
go down and then it is
recovering and it's now
actually higher than it was
at the peak of the crisis.
But if you look closely, you
see that the mortgage debts,
the biggest part
of it but it's not
because of mortgage
debt that we are
now in a situation of
more debt than we had at
the peak of the crisis.
The mortgage debt has not
actually recovered all
the way to where it
was at its peak.
It's the other elements
that have driven us higher.
Here's a graph.
Let me just walk you
through what's on this.
On this graph all I've done is,
I've taken all the
non-mortgage parts
of consumer credit and
graphed them separately here.
Each line here it's just taken
that same graph
before and now I'm
graphing everything
but the mortgage debt.
So you see this one line showing
us the home equity loans
and then the car loans,
credit cards, student
loans and everything else.
Let me just pull out
what I think are
the key trends to
notice in this graph.
So one thing you'll
notice here is that
credit card debt it
came off a bit after
the peak and its comeback.
It's right about now at where
it was at the maximum has when
people were taken down
their cards to deal with
the crisis in like 09 or so.
So it came off a bit again
and then has come up.
Not a whole lot of
movement there.
Home equity lines have
fallen off a lot.
They're almost down
like half of what they
were borrowing under
home equity lines.
Then you'll see what's
really taken off.
Actually taken off here is
student loans and car loans.
Now student loans.
Look at that student loan line,
that purple line there.
Notice how much has gone up
and almost in a straight line.
In 2003, you're looking at
about a quarter trillion
dollars total of student loans.
End of 2018, $1.5 trillion
of student loans.
That's a sixfold increase
over those years.
That's an enormous increase.
That's really as I said,
the major consumer credit
story of our time.
So student loans have
gone up a lot and you
can see also the other.
Look at the red line
there, car loans.
Car loans have really
taken off too.
Car loans are about half
a trillion more than they
were when they bottomed out
about six years before.
Also notice the other
does this catch all sort of
other term that actually has
been trending up over
the past five or six years
as the home equity lines
have gone down.
So now there's
about $410 billion of this
other which is something we
want to keep our eye on here.
So every sort of
consumer credit is ripe
for disruption by FinTech.
Mortgages.
Now the largest mortgage lender
in the country is Quicken.
All right, Quicken.
They grew out of helping
you with your taxes, right?
Well, Quicken is now
the largest mortgage lender.
Other FinTechs that
focus on car loans,
as you see car loans
have taken off.
But we're going to focus here,
because we're thinking about
marketplace lending,
peer-to-peer lending.
This is really about
the unsecured,
uncollateralized
part of the market,
so not borrowing to buy a house,
borrowing to buy a car,
it's loans that are
not secured by anything
in particular.
The main elements of consumer
credit that that's going
to mean is the credit card
debt and the student loans.
Okay, and of course
it's going to,
there's this other category,
is going to come up.
Okay, so credit cards.
Okay, thing about credit cards,
credit cards where
do they come from?
Credit cards entered
our economy like 50,
60 years ago, originally
all about convenience.
That's maybe why you got
a card in the first place.
Just convenience.
You run up charges
during the month,
pay at the end of the month.
But even if you got
it for convenience,
at some point you hit
a rough patch and it's just
not a good time to
pay that whole balance
if you don't have to,
and of course, you don't have to.
You can just pay some of
the balance and now
you're borrowing.
Now you're borrowing on your card
and you're paying the rate,
that maybe you didn't
even think much
about when you took out the card.
What rate would they charge you,
if you start running a balance
but now you're paying it.
Right, and that could
be a big number, right.
You could be talking about 15,
16 up to 20 percent
that you're paying
now for that loan that
you've taken out by not
paying your full balance.
Okay. So you're paying a big
interest rate on this loan.
It's not a collateralized loan.
The credit card company has
no claim on any particular
collateral there,
and that's of course
that's part of
why they're charging
you a big rate.
So now you've hit a rough patch,
you're borrowing on your card,
you're paying a big rate,
what can you do about it?
How can you lower
your interest rate?
Well, of course, to
some extent you maybe can
move your balance to
another card or to
another company once
you are balanced
and so they'll give
you a lower rate.
That can happen, and
of course that happen,
people do that.
If that's not so feasible,
another thing people
have often done
is take out a home-equity line.
Those home-equity lines we
just saw on that graph.
So home-equity line.
Now you are taking out
a new loan which is basically
a second mortgage on
your house coming
in second after
your first mortgage.
And you can get
a nice interest rate that way.
Why are you getting
a nice interest rate?
You're getting
a nice interest rate
because you've
pledged your house.
Right, you've pledged your house.
You've given a claim on
your house to this new lender,
that's why they're willing
to give you a low rate.
But of course the other side
of that coin is,
now you have increased
the risk of foreclosure,
losing your house in
foreclosure if things go bad,
and when things did go bad in
the crisis that's of course
exactly what happened.
So HELOCs if people call
home-equity line of credit.
HELOCs are a way
to refinance out
your credit card debt at
a lower rate but with
that risk, right? So okay.
So bear that in mind,
we'll get back to that.
Let's just think about student
loan debt for a second here.
So student loan debt
has gone way up.
You can see in part, to
some extent, this is,
you can say there's a perspective
once that's good news.
People are borrowing to
build their human capital.
The human capital is going
to be valuable to them,
help them make money
down the road.
But, even so there's a sense
in which it's good news.
Obviously that gigantic
ramp up in debt does flag
that something's
not going to plan.
People are borrowing
money that they have
trouble then paying off,
and this is going to cause
trouble down the road.
Now why is the student loan
balance growing so much?
Well, there's
a subtle point here.
You might think, well,
student loan balance goes
up because people keep borrowing.
Of course, that's part of it.
But an actual, in some sense,
bigger part of why it just
keeps going up and up and up,
is that when students,
when graduates hit a rough patch
with their student loan,
they can, these days,
take advantage of what's called
income-driven repayment.
Income-driven repayment.
I'm just going to sketch this.
If you want to learn
more about it,
go to the Department
of Education website,
they'll walk you through
the whole thing.
Let me just sketch what
income-driven repayment is.
What it is, is that
if you're having
trouble paying your student loan,
you can have your monthly payment
reduced to a number
which is basically
10 percent of
your disposable income.
Where they take your total
income and they subtract
out a subsistence
amount of income,
which is essentially 150 percent
of the poverty level.
They remove that
from your income,
look at what's left and they say,
okay, 10 percent of that
will now be your payment.
So you can have it reduced to
10 percent of
this discretionary income.
But, okay, so
your payment is reduced
but in fact there's no real
forgiveness here at this point.
So if the payment
you're making is
not covering the interest
that you owe,
then the interest you
didn't pay is going to be
added to what you still owe.
So in fact your balance
could be going up.
Could be going up while you
are on income-driven repayment.
It could keep going up
and ultimately what
happens with that,
well what happens is
that if you stick with
it to 20 years, right,
after 20 years, then at 20 years
whatever you still owe is
going to be discharged.
Okay, be discharged so
that one is you don't
owe it anymore.
So your balance can
grow over time and eventually
there's a discharge.
So part of what we're seeing in
this growth in student debt,
is this dynamic happening.
Let me just show you
one more graph from
the Department
of Education website.
This is showing you over
just a 5.5 year period.
Over 5.5 year period
it's showing you,
with the different colors,
the different repayment programs
that graduates are in.
The green that you
see in this graph
is people as the total number of
dollars in just regular fixed
payment repayment program.
The purple is people making,
what's called graduated
payments where they
are scheduled to go up over time.
The orange, the orange is
this income-driven repayment.
This is showing you
the total number of dollars
in income-driven repayment.
Notice in just over 5.5 years
how much that's gone up.
All right, just 5.5
years it's gone
up by a few hundred
billion dollars.
Okay so this is
happening in big scale
in real time right now,
and it's part of why
student debt keeps going up,
and it's also
something to bear in
mind when we get to talking about
the FinTechs because
the thing I want you
to bear in mind for
yourself is that if
you refinance out of
your student loan into
a new loan from a FinTech,
you cannot do income-driven
repayment anymore.
It's only for people
who still have their original
federal student loan.
Okay. So bear that in
mind and just bear
another thing in mind,
which is that when you
take out a student loan
in the first place,
you and everyone else who
took out a student loan
at the same time are
paying the same rate.
Okay, so think about this past.
There's this school year
that's just wrapping up
here at the University
of Pennsylvania,
we are wrapping up
the 2018-19 school year.
Well, if you took out
a student loan for
the 2018-19 school year,
then your interest rate was,
well I can tell you that
if you were an undergrad,
your interest rate
was 5.05 percent,
and if you were
a graduate student,
it was 6.6 percent.
I know that. How do I know that?
Because everybody
got the same rate,
and that rate is calculated
off of treasury rates.
All right, they follow a formula.
They say, okay, when
the treasury sold
10-year securities in May,
what was the yield at which
they sold those
10-year treasuries, right?
In May 2018, that yield
was three percent.
Okay. So okay, three percent.
We sold 10-year treasuries
at three percent.
Okay, so what we're
going to do is,
for the undergrad loans
we are going to add
2.05 percent to that number.
Now that's 5.05, right?
And for the grad
students we are going
to add 3.6 percent.
So that's how they get to 6.6.
So they calculated off
the treasury rates.
Everybody gets the same rate.
There's no risk-based pricing.
They're not going to look
at you and say, well,
I'm a little more worried about
you than the other person,
I'm going to charge you more.
No, everyone pays the same rate.
Okay. So once you're coming
out of grad's school,
everyone borrowed at
the same rate but
now they're clearly not
the same risk, right?
Some people got juicy jobs
with great salaries,
some people are still
having trouble,
and lenders can look
at that and say,
okay, this is interesting.
We got everyone's paying
the same rate but some
of these are clearly
better credits than others,
and that is going to be
the opportunity that the FinTechs
are going to be kind
of feasting on here.
So, okay. So just to summarize
so far, what have we said?
Here we've said that number one,
it's easy to slip into owing
money on your credit card.
Right now, if you look back
at that graph is a little
just under about a trillion
dollars of credit card debt,
and those people are very often
looking for ways to
refinance out of it.
You could do
the home-equity line,
but as we talked about that,
that can be worrisome
to go that path.
Now there's also a trillion and
a half of student loan debt now.
If you have a federal
student loan,
you have access to
these income-driven repayment.
On the downside, if things
don't work out so well,
if things do work
out well, well now,
you're paying the same
interest rate as anyone else,
and maybe that's
an opportunity for
a FinTech to come along and
offer you a different rate.
So that's our summary,
and in our next session
we'll talk about
the evolution of
peer-to-peer lending to
marketplace lending.